[docs] add YCQL example (#9997)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/latest/yugabyte-cloud/cloud-basics/create-databases-ycql.md

---
title: Create and explore a database using YCQL
headerTitle: Create and explore a database using YCQL
linkTitle: Create a database
description: Create and explore a database using YCQL.
headcontent:
image: /images/section_icons/quick_start/explore_ycql.png
menu:
  latest:
    parent: cloud-basics
    name: Create a database
    identifier: create-databases-2-ycql
    weight: 60
type: page
isTocNested: false
showAsideToc: true
---

<ul class="nav nav-tabs-alt nav-tabs-yb">

  <li >
    <a href="../create-databases/" class="nav-link">
      <i class="icon-postgres" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      YSQL
    </a>
  </li>

 <li >
    <a href="../create-databases-ycql/" class="nav-link active">
      <i class="icon-cassandra" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      YCQL
    </a>
  </li>
  
</ul>

> Using the `ycqlsh` shell, you can interact with your YugabyteDB database using the YCQL API. The following exercise shows how you can use ycqlsh to create a keyspace, add a table, insert some data, and run a simple query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `ycqlsh` shell, you can interact with your YugabyteDB database using the YCQL API. In the following exercise, you'll use ycqlsh to create a keyspace, add a table, insert some data, and run a simple query.
```

## Create a keyspace and add a table

To create a keyspace and add a table, do the following:

> 1. Connect to your cluster using `ycqlsh` using the [Client Shell](../connect-to-clusters#connect-via-client-shell) from your computer.

Reviewer: Do these instructions apply to the cloud shell, as well? (If so, worth mentioning, as that's easier.)

1. Create a keyspace called 'myapp'.

    ```sql

>     ycqlsh> CREATE KEYSPACE myapp;

Reviewer: I am tempted to introduce a style convention whereby we include the prompt once or twice, and then omit for the rest of a given procedure/page. I know they don't get copied when you use the button, but they still are kind of annoying. Style guide discussion fodder.

    ```

1. Create a table named `stock_market`, which can store stock prices at various timestamps for different stock ticker symbols.

>     ```sql

Reviewer: FYI, there's a `cql` option too. Highlighting may differ slightly and theoretically be better.
````suggestion
    ```cql
````

    ycqlsh> CREATE TABLE myapp.stock_market (
      stock_symbol text,
      ts text,
      current_price float,
      PRIMARY KEY (stock_symbol, ts)
    );
    ```

## Insert data

Insert some data for a few stock symbols into the `stock_market` table. You can copy and paste these values directly into your ycqlsh shell.

> ```sql
> ycqlsh> INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('AAPL','2017-10-26 09:00:00',157.41);
> INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('AAPL','2017-10-26 10:00:00',157);
> ```
> 
> ```sql
> ycqlsh> INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('FB','2017-10-26 09:00:00',170.63);
> INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('FB','2017-10-26 10:00:00',170.1);
> ```
> 
> ```sql
> ycqlsh> INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('GOOG','2017-10-26 09:00:00',972.56);
> INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('GOOG','2017-10-26 10:00:00',971.91);
> ```

Reviewer: You could combine these... (And drop the prompts 🤔)
````suggestion
```cql
INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('AAPL','2017-10-26 09:00:00',157.41);
INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('AAPL','2017-10-26 10:00:00',157);

INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('FB','2017-10-26 09:00:00',170.63);
INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('FB','2017-10-26 10:00:00',170.1);

INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('GOOG','2017-10-26 09:00:00',972.56);
INSERT INTO myapp.stock_market (stock_symbol,ts,current_price) VALUES ('GOOG','2017-10-26 10:00:00',971.91);
```
````
